---
layout: post
title: Whats new in Python 3.5?
type: post
excerpt: Python 3.5 was released in the 2nd week of September, 2015 and brought a bunch of useful changes with it. In this article, I'll be discussing some of the enhancements to the language that I found extremely useful in the latest release.
---

Apart from some of the smaller improvements like CPython optimizations, deprecations
and resolution to porting issues, following are some of the major enhancements that
directly or indirectly affects the Python developer community,

### async and await

Now we have the ability to use `async for` and `async with` inside a co-routine
function declared with `async def`. Inside a coroutine function, the new await expression
can be used to suspend coroutine execution until the result is available. Any object
can be awaited, as long as it implements the `__await__()` method.

{% highlight python %}
async def read_data(db):
    data = await db.fetch('SELECT ...')
{% endhighlight %}

`await` suspends the execution of `read_data` coroutine until `db.fetch` completes
and returns the result data.

### @-operator

Python 3.5 provides a new infix operator `@` for matrix multiplication. Matrix
multiplication is a notably common operation in many fields of mathematics,
science, engineering, and the addition of `@` allows writing cleaner code.

{% highlight python %}
>>> import numpy

>>> x = numpy.ones(3)
>>> x
array([ 1., 1., 1.])

>>> m = numpy.eye(3)
>>> m
array([[ 1., 0., 0.],
       [ 0., 1., 0.],
       [ 0., 0., 1.]])

>>> x @ m
array([ 1., 1., 1.])
{% endhighlight %}

### Unpacking

[PEP 448](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0448) extends the allowed uses of
the `*` iterable unpacking operator and `**` dictionary unpacking operator. It
is now possible to use an arbitrary number of unpackings designed to work in the
following way,

{% highlight python %}
>>> def fn(a, b, c, d):
...     print(a, b, c, d)

>>> fn(**{'a': 1, 'c': 3}, **{'b': 2, 'd': 4})
1 2 3 4

>>> [*range(4), 4]
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

>>> {'x': 1, **{'y': 2}}
{'x': 1, 'y': 2}
{% endhighlight %}

### Type hints

Type hints was perhaps the most talked topic in this year's [PyCon '15](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2wDvzy6Hgxg),
after Guide introduced it to the world. And predictably, it increased the anticipation
amongst the developer community for all the right reasons.

{% highlight python %}
def greeting(name: str) -> str:
    return 'Hello ' + name
{% endhighlight %}

### os.scandir()

In the latest release, there is a new addition to the directory iteration function,
`os.scandir()`, in the standard library. Additionally, `os.walk()` is now implemented
using **scandir**, which makes it 3 to 5 times faster on POSIX systems and 7 to 20
times faster on Windows systems. This is largely achieved by greatly reducing the
number of calls to `os.stat()` required to walk a directory tree.

Additionally, **scandir** returns an iterator, as opposed to returning a list of
file names, which improves memory efficiency when iterating over very large directories.

{% highlight python %}
for entry in os.scandir(path):
    if not entry.name.startswith('.') and entry.is_file():
        print(entry.name)
{% endhighlight %}

Ofcourse, the entire list of ehancements and improvements is pretty long. Refer
the official [changelog](https://docs.python.org/3.5/whatsnew/changelog.html)
for the complete list.
